###  **Introduction to R Hands-On Basic of R**

# ***1- Basic arithmetic operations (R can be used as a calculator)***

**+** (addition)

**-** (subtraction)

**\*** (multiplication)

**/** (division)

and **^** (exponentiation).

**Type directly the command below in the console:**


#### Addition

```
3 + 7
```

#### Substraction

```
7 - 3
```

#### Multiplication

```
3 * 7
```

#### Exponentiation

```
2 ^ 3
```

#### Modulo: returns the remainder of the division of 8/3

```
8 %% 3
```

***2- Basic arithmetic functions***

```
sum(x, y) # sum total of x + y - also works with vectors (see below)
```

```
log2(x) # logarithms base 2 of x
```

```
log10(x) # logaritms base 10 of x
```

```
exp(x) # Exponential of x
```

***3- Assigning values to variables***

```
# This will assigning x =2

x <- 2
```

```
# or use this

x = 2
```

```
# to print the value of x you can type x or use print function

print(x)
```

```
# Multiply the value of variables with another number - variable x can be used where you'd use a number

x * 6
```

***4 - Comparison operator***

-   *<* (less than): returns TRUE if the left operand is less than the right operand

-   *>* (greater than): returns TRUE if the left operand is greater thanthe right operand

-   *==* (equal to)

-   != (not equal to)

-   <= (less than or equal to)

-   >= greater than or equal

-   %in% is in - this is used with vectors (see below)

***5 - Basic data type***

-   1- There are basic data types: **numeric**, **character** and
    **logical**.

-   Numeric object: How old are you?

-   `my_age <- 28`

-   Character object: What\'s your name?

-   `my_name <- "Nicolas"`

-   \# logical object: Are you a data scientist?

-   (yes/no) = (`TRUE`/`FALSE`)

-   2- Class function to see the type of your data

`class(my_age)`

`class(my_name)`

3- You can also use the functions **is.numeric**(), **is.character**(),
**is.logical**() to check whether a variable is numeric, character or
logical, respectively.

`is.numeric(my_age)`

`is.numeric(my_age)`

4- If you want to change the type of a variable to another one, use the
**as.** functions, including **as.numeric**(), **as.character**(),
**as.logical**(), etc.

\# Convert my_age to a character variable

`as.character(my_age)`

***6 - Vectors***

Vectors combine multiple values (numeric, character or logical) in the
same object. In this case, you can have **numeric, character,** or
**logical vectors**.

A vector is created using the function c() (for concatenate), as follow:

```
# Store your friend\'s age in a numeric vector

friend_ages <- c(27, 25, 29, 26) # Create

friend_ages # Print

27 25 29 26
```

```
# Store your friend names in a character vector

my_friends <- c("Nicolas", "Thierry", "Bernard", "Jerome")

my_friends

"Nicolas", "Thierry", "Bernard", "Jerome"
```

```
# Store your friend\'s marital status in a logical vector

# Are they married? (yes/no = TRUE/FALSE)

are_married <- c(TRUE, FALSE, TRUE, TRUE)

are_married

TRUE FALSE TRUE TRUE
```

It's possible to give a name to the elements of a vector using the
function names().

```
# Vector without element names

friend_ages

27 25 29 26

# Vector with element names

names(friend_ages) <- c("Nicolas", "Thierry", "Bernard", "Jerome")

friend_ages

Nicolas Thierry Bernard Jerome

27 25 29 26
```

```
# You can also create a named vector as follows

friend_ages <- c(Nicolas = 27, Thierry = 25, Bernard = 29, Jerome = 26)

friend_ages
```

**Introduction to dplyr**

dplyr is a powerful R package designed for data manipulation and
transformation tasks. Developed by Hadley Wickham and others, it
provides a consistent set of functions that streamline manipulating data
frames and other data structures in R.

-   **Data Manipulation Verbs:**

dplyr provides intuitive and easy-to-use functions, often called "data
manipulation verbs" for common data manipulation tasks. These include
functions like `filter()`, `select()`, `arrange()`, `mutate()`, and `summarize()`.

-   **Pipes (%\>%):**

dplyr integrates seamlessly with the %\>% operator, also known as the
pipe operator, which allows you to chain together multiple operations
clearly and readably. This makes your code more concise and easier to
understand.

-   **Verb Functions:**

**Filter** (): Used to subset data frame rows based on specified
conditions.

**Select** (): This selects specific columns from a data frame.

**Arrange** (): Used to reorder data frame rows based on one or more
variables.

**Mutate** (): Used to create or modify new variables based on
calculations or transformations.

**Summarize** (): This function aggregates data and is often used in
combination with functions like **mean**(), **sum**(), **min**(),
**max**(), etc.

-   **Grouping Operations:**

dplyr supports grouped operations, allowing you to perform operations on
data grouped by one or more variables. This is achieved using the
group_by() function followed by other dplyr verbs.

-   **Joins:**

dplyr provides functions for joining data frames, including
**inner_join**(), **left_join**(), **right_join**(), and
**full_join**(). These functions enable you to combine data from
multiple sources based on common variables.

## Additional learning material

**R for descriptive Statistics and Graphics**

<http://www.sthda.com/english/wiki/descriptive-statistics-and-graphics>

**Data visualization with ggplot2**

<https://rpubs.com/GeospatialEcologist/DataViz>

**The Epidemiologist R Handbook**

<https://epirhandbook.com/en/reports-with-r-markdown.html>

####  **Additional Learning Resources**

1- This tutorial explains the installation, basics, and different types
of statistical analysis, which can be found under the analysis tab

<http://www.sthda.com/english/wiki/installing-r-and-rstudio-easy-r-programming>

2- introduction to ggplot2
(<https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2022/03/a-comprehensive-guide-on-ggplot2-in-r/>
)

3- Introduction to dplyr
<https://datacarpentry.org/R-ecology-lesson/03-dplyr.html>

3- introduction to tidyverse (<https://rpubs.com/ruruu127/417821>)

4- Automated data exploration process for analytic tasks and predictive
modelling with DataExplorer
<https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/DataExplorer/readme/README.html>

## R Learning Communities

1. The R for Data Science Community: <https://rfordatasci.com/>

2. R-Ladies (focused at women): <https://rladies.org/>
